---
title: "Automated detection of activity onset after postictal generalized EEG suppression"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020_12_24_PGES
excerpt: 'We investigate automatic detection of postictal generalized EEG suppression signature using a machine learning model, demonstrating the feasibility of such approaches.'
date: 2021-01-01
venue: 'BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12911-020-01307-7'
citation: 'Lamichhane, B., Kim, Y., Segarra, S., Zhang, G., Lhatoo, S., Hampson, J., & Jiang, X. (2020). Automated detection of activity onset after postictal generalized EEG suppression. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 20, 1-10.'
---

Background
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a leading cause of premature death in patients with epilepsy. If timely assessment of SUDEP risk can be made, early interventions for optimized treatments might be provided. One of the biomarkers being investigated for SUDEP risk assessment is postictal generalized EEG suppression [postictal generalized EEG suppression (PGES)]. For example, prolonged PGES has been found to be associated with a higher risk for SUDEP. Accurate characterization of PGES requires correct identification of the end of PGES, which is often complicated due to signal noise and artifacts, and has been reported to be a difficult task even for trained clinical professionals. In this work we present a method for automatic detection of the end of PGES using multi-channel EEG recordings, thus enabling the downstream task of SUDEP risk assessment by PGES characterization.

Methods
We address the detection of the end of PGES as a classification problem. Given a short EEG snippet, a trained model classifies whether it consists of the end of PGES or not. Scalp EEG recordings from a total of 134 patients with epilepsy are used for training a random forest based classification model. Various time-series based features are used to characterize the EEG signal for the classification task. The features that we have used are computationally inexpensive, making it suitable for real-time implementations and low-power solutions. The reference labels for classification are based on annotations by trained clinicians identifying the end of PGES in an EEG recording.

Results
We evaluated our classification model on an independent test dataset from 34 epileptic patients and obtained an AUreceiver operating characteristic (ROC) (area under the curve) of 0.84. We found that inclusion of multiple EEG channels is important for better classification results, possibly owing to the generalized nature of PGES. Of among the channels included in our analysis, the central EEG channels were found to provide the best discriminative representation for the detection of the end of PGES.

Conclusion
Accurate detection of the end of PGES is important for PGES characterization and SUDEP risk assessment. In this work, we showed that it is feasible to automatically detect the end of PGES—otherwise difficult to detect due to EEG noise and artifacts—using time-series features derived from multi-channel EEG recordings. In future work, we will explore deep learning based models for improved detection and investigate the downstream task of PGES characterization for SUDEP risk assessment.