---
title: "Dyadic Interaction Assessment from Free-living Audio for Depression Severity Assessment"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022_04_04_Interspeech2022
excerpt: 'We report the findings of our discover of depression severity markers in free-living dyadic interaction parameters.'
date: 2022-09-01
venue: 'Interspeech'
paperurl: 'https://www.isca-archive.org/interspeech_2022/lamichhane22_interspeech.pdf'
citation: 'Lamichhane, Bishal, Nidal Moukaddam, Ankit B. Patel, and Ashutosh Sabharwal. "Dyadic interaction assessment from free-living audio for depression severity assessment." arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03901 (2022).'
---

Psychomotor retardation in depression has been associated
with speech timing changes from dyadic clinical interviews.
In this work, we investigate speech timing features from freeliving dyadic interactions. Apart from the possibility of continuous monitoring to complement clinical visits, a study in
free-living conditions would also allow inferring sociability features such as dyadic interaction frequency implicated in depression. We adapted a speaker count estimator as a dyadic interaction detector with a specificity of 89.5% and a sensitivity of
86.1% in the DIHARD dataset. Using the detector, we obtained
speech timing features from the detected dyadic interactions in
multi-day audio recordings of 32 participants comprised of 13
healthy individuals, 11 individuals with depression, and 8 individuals with psychotic disorders. The dyadic interaction frequency increased with depression severity in participants with
no or mild depression, indicating a potential diagnostic marker
of depression onset. However, the dyadic interaction frequency
decreased with increasing depression severity for participants
with moderate or severe depression. In terms of speech timing
features, the response time had a significant positive correlation with depression severity. Our work shows the potential of
dyadic interaction analysis from audio recordings of free-living
to obtain markers of depression severity.