---
title: "A Template Matching Based Cough Detection Algorithm Using IMU Data From Earbuds"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022_09_27_SRA
excerpt: 'We provide a hardware/run-time efficient cough detection algorithm using IMU sensor (inertial measurement unit sensor).'
date: 2022-09-27
venue: 'International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI)'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9926839'
citation: 'Lamichhane, B., Nemati, E., Ahmed, T., Rahman, M., Kuang, J., & Gao, A. (2022, September). A Template Matching Based Cough Detection Algorithm Using IMU Data From Earbuds. In 2022 IEEE-EMBS International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI) (pp. 01-04). IEEE.'
---

Coughing is a common symptom across different clinical conditions and has gained further relevance in the past years due to the COVID-19 pandemic. An automated cough detection for continuous health monitoring could be developed using Earbud, a wearable sensor platform with audio and inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensors. Though several previous works have investigated audio-based automated cough detection, audio-based methods can be highly power-consuming for wearable sensor applications and raise privacy concerns. In this work, we develop IMU-based cough detection using a template matching-based algorithm. IMU provides a low-power privacy-preserving solution to complement audio-based algorithms. Similarly, template matching has low computational and memory needs, suitable for on-device implementations. The proposed method uses feature transformation of IMU signal and unsupervised representative template selection to improve upon our previous work. We obtained an AUC (AUC-ROC) of 0.85 and 0.83 for cough detection in a lab-based dataset with 45 participants and a controlled free-living dataset with 15 participants, respectively. These represent an AUC improvement of 0.08 and 0.10 compared to the previous work. Additionally, we conducted an uncontrolled free-living study with 7 participants where continuous measurements over a week were obtained from each participant. Our cough detection method achieved an AUC of 0.85 in the study, indicating that the proposed IMU-based cough detection translates well to the varied challenging scenarios present in free-living conditions.